---
layout: post
title: "gukesh's great choke"
date: 2026-04-25
tags: [chess]
---
## "The era where World Champions were the best players in the world died when Carlsen gave up his throne." - Garry Kasparov

I personally was not very shocked to see the superstar on fire defeat the inactive, tired player who was a mere shell of his former self who had indeed stated himself that he felt weary and practically happier after his loss, but it was an interesting moment for the chess world where the vacuum left by Carlsen had been taken by the younger generation. This was much to the chagrin of one Kasparov, who to me provided a very amusing 10 minutes ranting about the shift of chess to a younger generation. But aside from some of his ranting, which to be frank, was quite justified, he made some excellent points. Besides pointing out the obvious, his views on FIDE world champions were simply that it was just a 'FIDE title' and that whoever owned the title at the time was not necessarily the best player in the world, far from it. Even before Carlsen, the level of dominance Anand, and before him Kasparov (although perhaps Karpov would disgaree), and before him Fischer, all the way back to Capablanca and Morphy, displayed was simply above their peers. The only such player alive today is clearly Carlsen himself - what happens to the throne after he abdicated?

After Ding's infamous Rg6 to secure the World Championship in 2023, he virtually disappeared from competitive chess (although his own story is truly one of incredible outcomes, maybe I'll cover it), leaving many people convinced that the new challenger would become the new FIDE title holder. Indeed, his win in the Chennai Grand Masters with a [conservative last round draw against Harikrishna](https://lichess.org/broadcast/chennai-grand-masters-2023/round-7/ZklyKUjQ/EfVc2ylZ) pretty much guaranteed him to be a threat in the future. It also spoke to how the chess world was indeed getting younger, as Erigaisi would finish second only on tiebreak. After qualifying for the Candidates, the old Americans were still clear favorites, 'but okay, he had good chances to win'. I did not find Gukesh to be a threat until his rather impressive Round 5 win against Abasov, but in all honesty, it was the struggle between Caruana, Nakamura, and Nepo that allowed him to claw his way to the Candidates win.

This was of course because of his promising play, but I personally did not find it incredibly impressive - a young talent for sure, but some conclusions that I drew were that Ding vs. Gukesh would be a very tight battle, and that Gukesh was not 'that player', the next Carlsen; although now in retrospect, perhaps that is Sindarov. We shall see.

I remember waking to a surprising sight: Ding had clawed [a win](https://lichess.org/broadcast/fide-world-championship-2024/game-1/G2R2lPcA/TAq3z9DR) against Gukesh. With Gukesh's intelligence and prep, it was almost certain to me that they would inevitably make a boring draw, but it was admittedly invigorating to be deeply mistaken as Ding calmly squeezed Gukesh like it was 2018, and it was here that I felt that Gukesh's weaknesses in his intuition were slowly beginning to show. Moves such as 22. Qe1 were truly not intuitive at all; it was clear Gukesh was relying on almost pure calculation, being out of theory and unable to play on instinct in such a high pressure state. These cracks on Gukesh's intuition were vital to his situation later, insofar that some of his bolder inaccuracies did not befit his calculation style at all and perhaps were simply influenced by his previous experiences, like this one.

Regardless, Kasparov would prove to be right; Gukesh would find an easy win in Game 14 after Ding's ludicrous albeit understandable blunder and win 7.5-6.5 in almost ironic fashion, in my eyes a callback to how Nepo-Ding had ended as well. Up to this point, Gukesh had showed no real cracks in form - sure, he was shaky at times, and yes, he was more reliant on calculation than intuition, but it did not at all take away from his classical chess skills, which were obviously highly impressive. However, things began to slowly fall off a cliff as the media coverage and attention from the public slowly turned onto him. At first, Gukesh was elated: In India he was celebrated as a national hero. Prime Minister Narendra Modi hailed the victory as “historic and exemplary". However, influencers too were booming his name, and this was not helped by [the infamous Norway Chess table slam](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a0LJ33FfhBw) against none other than Carlsen. But even then, despite all this pressure from external sources, he was generally playing good chess. Certainly, his form seemed a bit worse than the World Championships, but that was fairly normal. Many, including myself (easily swayed much?) were convinced he would recover. Even the table slam itself was an homage to his proven resilience in sticky situations.

But this was not to be the case. He was upset in round ONE of the World Cup in Goa, which was truly a completely devastating result for him. A barrage of losses followed: Tata Steel 2026 last place, Menorca 2026, etc. Most obviously, his style had changed. He was playing more novelties, making more bold decisions, attempting, it seems, to experiment with different positions. Oftentimes he would find himself worse, and rarely landed a draw. This was shocking to me, as I had always envisioned his style as a solid player who would inexorably tear apart his opponents when they made a mistake. Not the endgame genius of Carlsen or the complexity of Tal, but his recent games seem to be trying to emulate more aggresive styles. Indeed, Gukesh is unique in that he may never recover from his poor form after having the crown thrust upon him so early, a gift and a curse for his youth and hunger. He snagged decisive wins rather than nullfying his opponents.

His rating dropped from from his peak 2794 to 2732 in a single year.

With all this historical context, one must look at the match between him and a destructive 10/14 Sindarov with great apprehension for Gukesh. With luck, he finds his form and takes off the pressure, for unlike Sindarov, he has been in that scenario of playing for the most heralded title in all of chess before. To me, it will be the most interesting World Championship match of the past decade (with some exemplary games being the exceptions, most notably the [finishing blow of Qh6+](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=juXVKAuGsVY) in Carlsen's 2016 scare against Karjakin and [Carlsen's endgame against Nepo](https://www.chess.com/news/view/fide-world-chess-championship-2021-game-6)). Sindarov will be undoubtedly bringing novelties to the board as he did in the Candidates, and Gukesh will know of his fire, so it is inevitable that there will be some impressive wins, perhaps a back-and-forth match score. While I do lean towards the side of Sindarov based on the clear disparity in form, what happens if Sindarov does win? Will his success story simply be another loop of Ding's and Gukesh's, where 'heavy is the crown' seemingly initiates a sudden decline in form? I predict that this will be the case. I do not believe he is the next Carlsen, and am just that much of a hater to say that he will almost certainly peak this year before stagnating until the end of the decade at the very least.

It would be much more interesting to see Gukesh fight tooth and nail, 1-0 followed by 1-1, with him eventually coming out on top, and would throw a wrench into Sindarov's momentum. The chess world would truly be in turmoil, and at this point it may even be considered an upset. In any case, I cannot wait for the Super Rapid and Blitz in mid-May, where they will have their first rapid encounter since Sindarov's Candidates win.

___

Remark: This is my first blog post! This is generally shorter than many of the things I will write, and I'm planning on diverging from what are essentially historical summaries with a little bit of personalization to hopefully more interesting articles. Some quick clarifications:

- I do not particularly like Gukesh, hence why this post may have seemed overtly negative towards him. He is still an incredible player and is only 19, meaning that he could recover from his deficits, especially considering his resilience. It must be noted, however, that I do not think he will ever become World Champion again if he loses to Sindarov later this year

- I certainly hope to cover what I find to be more interesting topics that I can cover in more depth (relating to chess at least), such as the future of engine use and preparation quality, or Fischer's legacy and brilliancy. It is difficult to discuss chess without looking at the past, but I will try my best to create novelties regarding these topics. Good news is many of the other topics I write about on this blog are far more lucrative when it comes to being able to generate original or interesting thought - if you're interested and have time to spare, go check it out!

- If you're from the distant future, thanks for coming all the way back to the start of my little inconsequential piece of the internet!
