---
layout: post
title: "the heights of despair"
date: 2026-04-26
tags: [life, philosophy]
description: "my experience and reflection on suicidal ideation"
---

## "Figure out what makes you click in the world." - anonymous

##### This post contains mentions of self-harm and thinking on pain and suffering. If you are sensitive or uncomfortable with the topics stated, please do not read this post.

There is an odd pattern in society that I've observed where friends of the opposite sex in a society that facilitates same-sex friendship have disproportionately large significance; at least, this was the case for me and my cousin. For the sake of privacy, I'll call her Kennedy, although this is not her real name. Kennedy and I were incredibly close. We had played together as innocent children concerned only with their emotions and naive little wants. After she passed unexpectedly in a surreal car accident combined with a number of other pressures in my life, it was then that I came closest to wanting to die.

The term suicidal ideation should not be confused with suicidal tendencies. In my view, the former term is far more minor and has less consequences. It could be as simple as having the indication of not wanting to wake up. The day I wanted to die, I imagined I would run out into the road, and that a car would sweep my legs under me like a ballerina dancer, sending me into the path of another such dancer to dance a quick half second waltz with blood and pain before a tire would simply pop my skull like a water balloon against hot pavement. It seemed rather easy and even appealing. How fortutitous I would be, in the kingdom of heaven or hell, or wherever I shall end up after my crossing, to have the burdens of life lifted from my shoulders. Perhaps it was the sudden realization of my fragility that prompted the urge to resist such feelings. My visions of blood spattered on the school bus that I myself rode to school dissipated. In retrospect, it seemed that it was the only time where I would ever almost act on my now-nonexistent suicidal tendencies.

The famous mythological water demon Charybdis is akin to a howling, sucking mouth that attracts all the things near it, almost like a tornado that seems to have attractive properties. The sort of sadness that drives one to such means of suicidal tendencies is very much akin to standing on a ship in Charybdis's current. It is a specialized type of torture which surrounds a person and penetrates so deeply that one is paralyzed to act, such that they can do nothing but watch, with eerie detachment, their own demise. A crewmate may scream at the individual to flee on the lifeboats without knowing that the person is unable to do so, before that crewmate perishes as well, futile efforts wasted. Charybdis's force and matter is so spectacular that the body does not have the strength to flex its musculature in any meaningful way, and so the individual must only, and can only, surrender to the desires of the water that crashes upon them.

[The Last Messiah](https://openairphilosophy.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/OAP_Zapffe_Last_Messiah.pdf) is a short essay written by Peter Wessel Zapffe. The essay is quite philosophical and is far more concerned with the path humanity has set themselves upon rather than the individual, but Zappfe here makes an outstanding observation that serves well for the latter. Take the Irish elk, a mammal which grew the largest antlers in the animal kingdom at 3.65 meters across. The elk grew its antlers so large that it was unable to hold its own head up and thus unable to feed properly, leading to its eventual extinction. This is often like the human condition for the individual. We have such capacity for empathy and sensitivity that the result can be self-sabotage. A flower dies or an eagle takes a squirrel and we feel pain for things that do not feel pain themselves. Scorned by a lover or a friend, we are struck by bouts of emotion which fall outside the bounds of rationality, yet it is described as the condition of being human, the burden. Oftentimes this notion is quickly neutered by a pretentiously logical demon on one shoulder that says in a tinny voice that scolds us. I am privileged to live in a bourgeois society that provides me with an excellent education and good opportunities for the future. I am privileged for the clean air I inhale every moment and the roof over my head, to have not been born slaving in child labor in a Myanmar factory or starving in some rural, cold location in the Baltics. Such arguments echo dully against one's head and of course do no good. There is, hedonistically, no need to make any significance of life other than your own selfish needs and wants, although society's beneficiaries may say that life is meant to help facilitate the lives of others. The wiser of those may say that life is to find one's life's meaning at all.

Pain is too made difficult by its tendency to elude vocabulary. How often has the depressed individual been prompted by some version of "what do you have to be sad about?" or "look at X, Y, and Z qualities of your life - why should you be in sorrow?" These are bad questions because they have no answers. Some unique sorts of pain are so great and so large that they cannot be articulated properly, no matter how hard one tries or how fluid and descriptive their language. Our own linguistics, made to communicate our intentions, fail in the face of such great heights of despair. And as such we cannot express our feelings to anyone, including ourselves, but merely offer gestures and platitudes that others may understand, for they too have looked such despair in the eyes before as well. But it only hurts more to let the guilt and misery wallow independently of one another, to let the despondency, despite understanding, fester and grow. In solitude is where pain strikes most acutely. Even joy reminds us not to feel joyous, but of the joy itself which we cannot find.

___

In my eyes, the word trauma has been used in modern parlance to the point of exhaustion. I once looked diminutively at the word, and when I heard people proclaim their past traumas I recoiled with perhaps a sort of resigned weariness. But I have realized the concept of trauma remains true and real regardless of how casually that word may be thrown around. I must also consider that trauma is part of pain, and so it is just as subjective as the aforementioned concept of pain.

Trauma plays a very mean hand to its sufferer. It does not impact only the things which are immediately relevant to the traumatic pain, but rather can fundamentally realign one's entire worldview. The realignment that can occur forms a giant provos between the emotional and the rational sides of the spirit. A person may feel that life is generally a good and safe place that is not populated by monsters, so if that person is the victim of some singular event wherein reality shows its cruelty, they may feel a permanent rift in how they perceive the world. If the world is X, why did Y happen? This can call into serious question all that we feel and know about the world in which we live, about the nature of humanity. Suddenly a person is stricken not only with the pain of the event, but with the pain of disillusion. However, the concept of trauma has a particular enemy of thought in the English language. People like to say "what doesn't kill you makes you stronger," which can certainly be true. Take, however, a dolphin which has had its fin mangled by a boat propeller and scarred for life before fisherman realized what it was and released it. The dolphin may continue swimming and the wound may heal, but the dolphin is not stronger. It cannot hunt nor swim as adeptly as it once did. Each time it hears the familiar roar of a motor, it is fractured, remembering what had happened before, and hides for cover. Things can hurt humans in much the same way. Wounds of the flesh must heal or a human will die of blood loss or organ failure. Wounds of the spirit do not have this quality. They do not need to heal. We can go on through life limping and cowering, and even the most vague cacophonies send us, like the dolphin, hiding from his boats.

In his essay The Palliative Society, contemporary writer Byung-Chul Han discusses the role of pain. He points to many of the beauties of pain, which I do think are real. It is by accepting the potentiality of pain that we can enter into life's most fulfilling relationships. Indeed, we conversely know these relationships are true and fulfilling by their capacity to enact anguish. Byung-Chul notes that everything which is true is painful; with our loved ones, a rift or even separation which causes suffering shows that the relationship bursts with truth. I challenge the viewer here to imagine something truly worth doing which is simultaneously incapable of causing anguish. Certainly we should not actively seek pain, or champion suffering, or envy those in sorrow. We also must not abandon our brothers or sisters in moments of crisis. But we should recognize that suffering is an inexorable part of the human condition. To live is to feel many things, and one of them is pain. But pain is neither bad nor good — it is instead an ecosystem which at once contains decay and growth. I do not agree with the hardline notion that pain is good, that suffering makes us better. But I do believe that being a quintessential piece of life, we should seek for and identify the benefits of pain. We too often regard feelings of pain as weakness, as if these sensations are relegated to only a few among us. This is of course false. Holistically speaking, pain is like a stone we are forced to carry, and so we would be best served not to languish only in obligation, but instead we may see if this stone can be used for other purposes. Byung-Chul Han points to a letter written by Franz Kafka. In the letter, Kafka says that writing was a reward for the fact that he was pinched, beaten, and ground nearly to dust by the devil. Thus for Kafka, to write was inseparable from his suffering. Pain can be the kindling for our highest creative pursuits, for our imagination itself. The anguish can be a demon, most certainly, but the world we build in defense against it is more holy and spectacular than our suffering could ever be. Pain propels us forward. It fractures our attachment to old ideas and concepts. Without discomfort we would be most perfectly happy to remain as is forever. As a matter of fact, disruption tears apart conception and forces us to build new ones. Change, particularly change that allows us to become better, is inevitably accompanied by suffering.

It bears repeating that pain is not inherently good, but it is not also bad (is anything really?). It is neither. Suffering just is. We cannot remove pain from our world; believe me, the tales in which one tries often end up in simply more pain. If we attempt to free ourselves of pain entirely, then we find a dangerous situation, one certainly more dangerous than accepting pain as a reality of life. These led to my suicidal tendencies, and that of a million others. We experience the inevitable pain, but we have been unable to equip ourselves in preparation, and we are now unable to transmute the feelings once they have flooded us. It must be repeatedly emphasized to the point of intuition that we must not build some illusory existence where pain is something we can eliminate. Should we understand, and be able to deal with that sort of deep suffering in its endless fractals and incarnations, that is more than enough.

I once thought of life as a mountain. To me it was something we must climb and summit with some grand destination in mind. Life was one large obstacle and we were meant to spend our days conquering that obstacle. Pain was the stumble from the mountain, the misstep that decayed ascension; perhaps even life itself was a fight in pain. But with that pain, you would learn determination and the skills and resilience to continue.

I have since abandoned this idea. Through my trawls communing with others, I have since developed the thought that life is not a mountain but a valley which we walk through. It is ambivalent in totality, functioning as its own ecosystem, generally uncaring of the individual, but it is incredible in its many pieces. The flying seeds of dandelion are the stirrings of town and its residents. The grass massages my feet like Kennedy's cat's paw in my lap in front of the fire. The sun too shines like the smiles of those I love, which fade in time and are replaced by nights of darkness, only for the day to inevitably reemerge. Bees tend to their flowers and they may sting me as they do so, but this is owing not to my actions, and instead to ruminations and psychologies which always I cannot or need not understand.

As I walk through the meadow, I know I will one day, and in due time, reach the tree line where this valley disappears into the darkness of a forest. I hope that by then I have appreciated the valley so intensely that I can only welcome a change of scenery.

___

Remark: The quote in the heading is not verbatim. I do not intend to smudge this person's reputation or anything malevolent, but simply wish to pay tribute. Moreover, I'm sorry for the deeper sort of post. Much of what I write in the sphere related to the human condition is rather philosophical. Regularly scheduled programming continues on with the next post on the Riemann zeta function.

The idea of life being a valley is admittedly not mine own, but a literary I deliberately employed to help stoke the reader.

Kennedy died on November 28th, 2025. If you've read the entirety of this post, thank you for tolerating my self-romanticization and excessive imagery. Please also reach out to me if you can spare the time by whatever means available on the landing page to signify that you've made it. If you're at a loss for words to say or do not wish to somehow damage my emotions regarding the subject, simply state that 'she is waiting for you'. I will be most comforted, more than you can ever know, and perhaps you too will someday walk on from the precipice that you encountered on that day when you, too, felt most injured.
