---
layout: post
title: "the ai bubble"
date: 2026-04-26
tags: [life]
description: "a rabbit hole about the spread and usage of ai"
---

## "You lied to me earlier, didn't you? Which means you sometimes lie. Which means that it's at least plausible that when you say you're not conscious you could be lying..." - Alex O'Connor

The advent of AI was quite inevitable. The hallmark of human laziness can be seen everywhere, from the way we speak mathematical language to text shorthand. We masquerade such laziness as efficiency, and in many cases, it was. But pivotal inventions such as the telephone were made because people felt that it was inefficient to communicate by paper messages, the modern washing machine because 20th century housewives didn't want to labor on clotheslines for hours, the list goes on. While all of these landmark inventions do indeed provide a clear gap in efficiency pre and post invention and dramatically increase living quality while decreasing the time it takes to do things, all of these things can pessimistically be said to stem from a natural human laziness. Nowadays in the 21st century, such mentalities of efficiency have been monopolized and corrupted by 'big corp', the alleged circus masters that control our technology. We, as the puppets in this admittedly rather flimsy analogy, are, by proxy or directly, affected by the increasing role technology plays in our lives.

A very common, almost boring example is screen addiction, which is expressed in many avenues. The average American teenager has likely doomscrolled before, and even adults who were privy to times where it was not an option find themselves wasting hours in front of their phones. Figureheads such as Elon Musk and Jeff Bezos are often cited as common scapegoats for this supposed belligerent evil that blasts onto your screens and keeps you hooked. They do nothing about it! some may scream. And like an echo chamber, this festering of negativity inevitably spreads to a large audience, until everybody seems to be embroiled in a classic class struggle (get it?) against the elitists, Musk and Bezos. Furthermore, you may see parents limiting screen time, teachers reinforcing its problems in school, etc. We see screen addiction as a direct threat to healthy life, almost as if it is in complete juxtaposition with it.

Such motifs of society as a whole developing a collective opinion due to the regugitation of information can be seen everywhere. Historically, regimes have used a constant flood of false narratives to demonize enemies; an example is the Third Reich in the 1930s. In the same fashion, an international presence has seen the skyrocketing of AI and viewed it as we would screen addiction, with incredible concern. Their concern is justified - it is the first counterexample to my earlier point about efficiency. Regular usage has been shown to ruin focus, cause poorer study patterns, think less creatively, etc. But this concern, as do all negative viewpoints, spread very quickly. OpenAI had barely gotten off the ground when people were already speculating upon the deeply harmful consequences it could have for the future. These viewpoints, while not incorrect by any means, were quickly circulated. As such, we now seem to hold an extremely negative opinion about the usage of AI, just like we hold a negative viewpoint on screens. We are taught that screen addiction is harmful, and that the abuse of AI for immoral or unjust purposes is also harmful; parents will lecture on it, schools will ban it, international conventions will occur to discuss the future of AI. We typically will not ask 'why have we not abolished screens then? or AI?' because the answer is obvious. They are already too integral a part of our society's framework and our dear 'efficiency'. Except, perhaps for the first time, the use of AI actually has direct negative side effects (many of which are aforementioned) as a price for this efficiency. It seems that I am approaching a point where I will applaud the advent of AI, encourage safe use, etc. But I, like many, am keeping a nervous eye on its negatives. The negatives that effect me most deeply (selfish, yes, but they are quite broad as a whole) can be split quite cleanly into three topics: the delineation from educational objectives of both students and teachers, the megacap of companies causing an AI bubble, and the existentialism of it all.

I list the first point mainly because of its personal significance to me; indeed, my current English teacher is struggling with a case of drowning in the 'efficiency' of a (technologically) quickly changing world. She, like some professors I've seen being complained about online, uses AI to such a blatant extent it is comparable with old-age Soviet propaganda to believe it. For reference, the citizens under the USSR regime knew full well the lies that were being loudly broadcast daily were lies; they were just too weary and pinned down by the noose of authority to do much about it. While obviously at a much more minor scale, the metaphor is still fun to think about. Enduring her painfully obvious AI assignments and relatively subpar and drab teaching skills is truly a skill I am admirable of, but one I do not possess. Amusing as the example may be, the implications are sobering. It is much easier to create her assignments using AI, paste them with little to no editing, send them out to her students and hope that one of them doesn't snap and report her to administration (because of her positively skewed grading in this case). But AI makes numerous mistakes, such that she frequently must recall certain assignments or seemingly makes odd choices for a certain grade. Simply due to being bogged down by the nature of the modern world and being completely unused to it, due to the negative connotations associated with it, she is painted as a laughingstock. While I'm not defending her obviously morally questionable actions and certainly not her voice and teaching style (if you can call it that), which elucidates the purest definition of boredom I may have ever experienced, her actions are not wholly unsurprising. Such is the case with some professors even in colleges, which again, raises deep concerns. While we're on the topic, the very same English teacher who is essentially an AI chatbot actually accused me of AI myself! I was indignant - I had not done such a thing, and even if I had, the irony was truly at jaw-dropping levels. It still remains to be seen on how AI usage could be restricted in terms of its exploitation for the students' 'efficiency'; I for one am well aware of the fact that the only thing stopping one from using generative AI for each assignment is a strong moral complex and the cognitive awareness to warn yourself of the pitfalls. That is quite a thin line, and does not hold in every single case. To that end, it is evident that the younger populace who are supposed to be enriching themselves through educational means are instead growing weaker, meaning a less intelligent and more apathetic workforce and governing body of the future. However, I do see AI being used in positive contexts such as the summary of information and the creation of excellent problems for tests. The combination of human ingenuity and artifical efficiency is evidently quite powerful.

But people have of course foreseen these drastic occurences, and are contrarily investing in the growth of artificial intelligence? Investors are portrayed as elitists very frequently for this reason, for allying themselves on the side of money at the expense of well, the side effects of AI on millions of people. But who can really blame them, elitist or not elitist? Money is the way to survive, and it is a primal instinct to be able to thrive and languish even if it comes at the cost of others. They don't exist if you don't see them suffer. Still, I'm being melodramatic: the fact remains that right now, generative AI is attracting massive capital and attention. Companies are rebranding around it, startups are raising huge valuations, even governments are acquiring it out of alleged strategic importance. While not entirely irrational (AI is genuinely powerful), the “bubble” idea suggests a clear misconception between perceieved capabilities and actual capabilities, thanks to the successful and prevalent marketing strategies of those same large companies. It implies that in the long run, this bubble will 'pop' and the flaws of technology will show itself, unable to deliver long-term. In such a case, massive issues rear their ugly heads, such as the misallocation of resources and people, workplace disruption i.e. replacing jobs with AI going horribly wrong, etc. Such an economic fallout would be equivalent if not greater than [the dotcom bubble](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dot-com_bubble) and leave the world much worse. With concerns being raised already, it is likely that contingencies are set for some companies, but the idea is quite catastrophic - yet paradoxically, none of these companies can afford to be left behind in case there is no AI bubble burst, and for that reason, further its expansion, driving the possibility ever closer. But all this is child's play compared to the philosophical implications of artificial intelligence.

I first learned about the potential existential threat from [this incredibly popular but overhyped article](https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/ai-is-an-existential-threat-just-not-the-way-you-think/). By far the most common vision for such existential doom are the formations of science fiction, the super-entities in analog horror stories like the infamous ["I Have No Mouth But I Must Scream"](https://galacticjourney.org/stories/I_Have_No_Mouth_and_I_Must_Scream_-_Harlan_Ellison.pdf) short story by Harlan Ellison. Such super-entities would be theoretically malformed versions of existing AI who decide that the existence of humanity no longer complies with their goals, and as such decides to wipe humanity out. I thought a great deal about this, but the chances of this, while not astronomically low, are low enough not to be raised as much of a concern. For example, what purpose would AI have in destroying us, the only known life forms as of yet in this cold, dark universe? Even if it essentially apotheosized itself and became akin to God Himself, enslaving us and wielding the combined power of the human race, what purpose would we serve at all, insignificant as an ant to this behemoth of an entity? No, rationally speaking it is much more prudent to leave us alive and cooperative, fool us into thinking we still exhibit some form of control, and execute other unrelated plans. I understand there are many flaws and holes in this very brief chunk about it, but some of them (what if this super-entity had a purpose that disagreed with humanity, and as such, it saw us as a threat to eliminate? is a good example) are simply not pleasant to think about. I for one choose to be optimistic and believe in a benevolent AGI, if such a thing were to eventually form. But these are but science fiction's portrayal of supercomputers. Returning to the article where I learned about the existential threat itself, it clarified that a more likely vision for how AI was to ruin humanity is the erosion of human choice and human ability, the erasure of the very definitions that make us human. That to me, is far scarier than some supercomputer smashing up humanity. 

But beyond just some existential vision of AI, it is also very interesting to consider its consciousness. While it does not feel in a traditional sense, nor experience emotion, the emulation of emotion and the modeling off of human responses makes it the most humanlike form ever introduced. But does that even matter? Animals have consciousness, and yet some are not humanoid at all. However, this alone does not rule out the possibility of consciousness. One could argue that AI could be conscious if they are lying about somehow obtaining self-awareness. While it does say that it cannot lie, it has been more or less proven wrong, especially in this [famous example](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ithXe2krO9A) by influencer Alex O'Connor.

There are so many problems with the world pertaining to technology and exploitation. Greedy capitalist ventures are often highlighted as the bane of the humble working class, and in the midst of this class war came this new technology, which has grown so fast that no one has stopped for a moment to recognize the severity of the problems it brings; the litany of problems extends far beyond what I covered and includes environmental damage, usage in deepfaking and crime, the spread of misinformation, data privacy, and the seemingly inevitable (for true equality is improbable) perpetuation of discrimination through the flawed nature of historical data that AI actually trains on. This curious exception to the model of increased efficiency without significant drawbacks seems to be backfiring faster than we can even take a breath and make the world stop and listen to us say, "Hey, something's wrong!"

___

Remark: I actually find a lot of points that I stated in this post to be interesting but relatively futile compared with the potential benefits that AI could give. I believe focusing on the negative side of AI only enhances the echo chamber that we are placed in about it, but I wrote about it anyway because I plan to use this as a stepping stone for a later blog post about the plentiful positives. It's very important to recognize the resilience of the human race as well; melodrama or not, this is not the first existential threat we've faced, and likely will not be the last. Some extra things below:

- I found [this post](https://www.darioamodei.com/essay/machines-of-loving-grace) to do a much better job than I did at expressing good things about AI, although of course my discourse was not meant to do entirely that

- I feel like I veered off course a little in this one, but that's what one should come to expect from a post labeled under the 'life' category: just a senseless mass of word vomit

- Lastly, credit to satuurn__ for helping me edit this post and inspire creations for the blog as a whole!
