---
layout: post
title: "peculiar panels"
date: 2026-07-19
tags: [physics]
description: "some world cup discourse"
---

Every few years, there's a momentous event in some field that is massively influential to it. The drug daraxonrasib has proven to be notoriously effective against pancreatic cancer since its recent discovery some months prior. Artificial intelligence has had irrefutable effects on the economy and the world at large with its ballooning development. The digitization of board games such as checkers and chess has led to popularity booms, trackflation continues to produce incredible prodigies at seemingly younger and younger ages, exploration missions like Artemis II delve into uncharted areas, and wars begin and rage on for years. Many of these events are actually recurring. The presidential cycle in America, for one, saw Donald Trump back to his presidential seat in late 2025 and repeats every four years. Indeed, the FIFA World Cup also occurs every four years and is the most globally viewed sporting event, drawing in about 5 billion viewers. (Incidentally, the Paris Olympic Games drew in staggering numbers close to 5 billion as well - and the Summer Olympic Games also occurs every four years.) Because of its rarity, I figured I should take note of this occasion and dedicate a little bit of time to it. But to where would I go? I am by no means a soccer fan, and only know the names of current star players and some very famous, practically baseline knowledge (like Zlatan's bicycle kick or the Hand of God). Moreover, divulging my opinion on certain players and teams, even if I were to do research on them, would be moot and not contribute much at all. There is so much harmful discourse happening in the sultriest of places, with self-appointed 'enlightened' individuals duking it out in an epic battle of, in actuality, prosaic and repetitive battles of opinion. With this in mind, I chose to turn to the field that I know best; science and technology.

Historically, footballs were nowhere near the elegant spheres we see today. Early balls consisted of inflated animal bladders wrapped in stitched leather, and because pigs were evidently not interested in producing perfectly spherical bladders for the convenience of nineteenth-century athletes, the resulting balls were irregular and heavy. One hardly needed advanced mathematics to derive the obvious flaws in this design. A sphere encloses the greatest possible volume for a given surface area and, perhaps more importantly for football, behaves identically regardless of how it is rotated. While not the same concept, one's eyes can be drawn towards the Hairy Ball Theorem, which states in relatively simple terms, that one cannot comb a hairy ball (say a coconut, thank you Google) flat since there will always be a place where the vector value is zero. This is somewhat similar to how a nonspherical shape will always trend towards a certain direction. However, it is physically quite difficult to produce a real sphere without the material being stretched in some way. To combat this, early scientists chose to approximate a sphere.

It is fairly intuitive that increasing the number of flat faces makes an object appear progressively rounder; a cube does not resemble a football, but the distinction becomes fainter and fainter the more sides the shape has. Immortalized by the Adidas Telstar used during the 1970 World Cup, consisted of thirty-two stitched panels: twenty regular hexagons and twelve regular pentagons. The arrangement has since become so iconic that many people, including myself, would instinctively draw a football using precisely those shapes despite modern balls looking rather different.

One might reasonably ask why twelve pentagons are necessary at all. Why not simply construct the ball entirely from hexagons? The answer lies in one of those delightful situations where geometry quietly dictates reality. A regular hexagon possesses interior angles of 120°, meaning that three hexagons meeting at a point sum to exactly 360°. Pentagons, however, contribute only 108° at each corner. Three meeting together total 324°, leaving a missing angle of 36°. Twelve such defects distributed throughout the structure produce precisely enough curvature for it to become a truncated icosahedron. You may recognize this terminology hearing of the same geometry adopted by buckminsterfullerene, the famous C₆₀ carbon molecule or the buckyball. The geometry, however, is only half the story. 

_________

In 1997, Roberto Carlos scored a free kick against France. The ball appeared destined for the advertising boards before unbelievably curving inside the post, prompting countless viewers to conclude that something supernatural had occurred. How can one explain this?

A football spends very little time behaving like the idealized projectile introduced in high school physics. Even in my school’s algebra class, we were taught that an object launched with some initial speed follows a beautiful parabolic trajectory, and while this is perfectly correct in the absence of air, the presence of an atmosphere complicates things drastically. 

The first instinct is usually to blame gravity. After all, every projectile curves downward as it travels. Unfortunately, gravity only acts vertically; it cannot explain why the ball also drifted sideways. Air resistance is not much help either; drag acts only opposite the direction of motion. Hence, if the trajectory is changing horizontally, there must exist some horizontal force acting on the football throughout its flight. That force comes from the ball's spin. 

As the ball rotated, it dragged a thin layer of surrounding air with it. On one side of the football, the surface moved in the same direction as the incoming airflow, accelerating the air, whereas on the opposite side, the surface moved against the airflow, slowing it down. According to Bernoulli's principle, the speed of air has an inverse relationship with its respective pressure zone. The resulting pressure imbalance continuously pushed the football sideways throughout its flight, known as the Magnus effect. Immediately after Carlos struck the ball, the sideways force did not have much time to noticeably alter the trajectory, making the shot appear wildly inaccurate. As the ball continued through the air, however, the pressure of the sidespin acted continuously, bending the path further and further until what initially appeared to be an errant strike curved dramatically back toward the goal.

Returning to the subject of ‘more faces = more spherical’, another reason why the idea for an entirely spherical ball was rejected was because the Magnus effect has little to no presence in the absence of drag, which rough surfaces propagate. In short, with more cracks in the surface (i.e. fewer faces), the more pronounced such an effect becomes. Scientists have struggled to achieve a pure balance in aerodynamic ability. For example, the Jabulani used at the 2010 World Cup was widely criticized for being too wobbly and aerodynamically inconsistent. People want to see plays like Carlos’s, but only achieved through incredible skill and timing, not some machination of the ball itself. From all these innovations, then, comes the current version of the World Cup ball used in 2026: the Trionda.

The current day and age is measurably more complex than just a few years ago. If I may now re-cite the technological revolution as of late, the information age has now grown so widespread that scientists have even seized the opportunity to incorporate a 500Hz internal measuring unit, which sends data packets 500 times per second to stadium receivers, instantaneously tracking the ball’s position at every millisecond along all three axes in space. This process is helped by radio signaling, all of which emits from a system housed in the middle of the ball. The system also will register the exact point of contact, giving the VAR footage to evaluate offside claims, fouls, etc. Indeed, one funny detail is that it charges wirelessly so as to avoid any physical plugs disturbing its surface before the game. In short, its internal workings are nothing short of the latest technology to ensure a fair and accurate game (provided, of course, that the referees themselves aren’t biased… who’s to say?). But its external workings are also imaginative in design, boasting thermal bonding that creates a waterproof exterior that works in the same way regardless. All this is to say that the World Cup ball is indeed the most advanced it has ever been, and yet its technological capabilities remain surprisingly (or perhaps not so) hidden from online discourse. But perhaps this is for a greater good. After the controversy surrounding the Jabulani, manufacturers realized that the mathematically smoothest sphere was not necessarily the aerodynamically best one. As described, recent designs have instead focused on controlling the airflow, surface texture, panel arrangement, etc. so that the ball behaves consistently at the speeds professionals actually strike it. It is, in some sense, a concession that nature had the final word all along.

Despite all the efforts of scientists to innovate the football, fluid dynamics is still one of the most notoriously difficult areas of physics, so much so that the Navier-Stokes equations are still among the Millennial Prize Problems. While there certainly may be new leaps in the future (perhaps concerning a better understanding of turbulence), like the average football fan, while I may not be as rabid nor invested, I am still much more concerned with the scoreline at hand than the science behind the ball.

________

Remark: This is my first post in some time; I felt rather stagnant in updating this blog, as I couldn’t muster up the effort to type something in-depth up. Any time I tried to, I would reject it; because of some of the pieces that I put out before my hiatus, I tried to hold myself to the same depth of work. Finally, I’ve seemingly overcome my writer’s block and put out a reasonable piece here. I will (hopefully) be back to weekly posts starting now.

As of today, the World Cup final has concluded, so it’s a pretty good time to put this out. Argentina weaseled their way to the final, so I’m pretty glad to see them go out in such a fashion that enraged many fans. Probably my favorite moment was Messi trying to red card a spanish player for covering his mouth while speaking.



